Palghar is a new 36th district and a Municipal Council in Maharashtra. Palghar (Maharashtra), Aug 1 (IANS) Maharashtra's 36th district Palghar was craved out of India's most populous district Thane. Situated about 87 kilometres from Mumbai, it is a railway station on the Western Line of the Mumbai Suburban Railway which extends up to Dahanu and lies on the Mumbai-Ahmedabad rail route. Palghar is the next Important Station after Virar on the Western Railway and is also accessible by the Mumbai-Ahmedabad National Highway (NH 8). The town is complete with everything necessary for a comfortable life including shopping centres, schools, colleges, cinemas, restaurants and hospitals. The environment is luscious and pollution-free which creates a tranquil ambience and ideal atmosphere to start any activity.

With a population of over 12 million, Thane held the distinction of being the most populated district in the country, spread across 9,600 sq.kms of hills, forests and coastal areas.

Just as Thane is well-connected by Central Railway and Eastern Express Highway, the semi-industrialised Palghar has good connectivity from Western Railway and Western Express Highway, around 90 kms north of Mumbai.

It is also a popular weekend getaway destination for Mumbaikars with its sprawling chikoo and coconut farms, the famous Kelva Beach, Vaghoba Waterfalls, Goddess Shitladevi Temple and Shirgaon Fort.

This is the first major bifurcation of a district since 1999, when Gondiya and Gadchiroli were created in the eastern Vidarbha region of the state, taking the total count to 35 districts in Maharashtra.

The town is an Important hub for all the facilities after Virar. Various age groups of people travel from the surrounding villages for different job opportunities, education, business, shopping, health care facilities, etc. Many villages are connected to Palghar via road & rail. The government provides State Transport Bus facility to access this villages. Various villages surrounding Palghar include Tarapur, Umroli, Kelva, Satpati, Shirgaon, Saphale, Sartodi etc. A separate Palghar district would be carved out of Thane district by August 15, 2014

Employment

The main occupation of the people of Palghar is employment in factories and farming. The land surrounding Palghar abounds in human resources - skilled and unskilled. Apart from the government promoted MIDC situated at Tarapur, Palghar is also home to a number of Industrial Townships where there are many small scale industries such as engineering, pharmaceutical, plastics, textile, notebook industries. Maharashtra's biggest fishing center, Satpati, is located around 8 kilometres from Palghar railway station. There are farms growing chickoos, coconuts, palm dotted all around villages around Palghar. Rice is grown on agricultural lands during the monsoon. A large part of the population commutes to Mumbai daily to make a living. Palghar along with Dahanu accounts 50% of nations Chickoo's produce. Government of Maharashtra has established Cocnut research center and Farm in Palghar. Further, Centrel Government along with ONGC is all set to 10000-crores gas processing plant in Palghar. ONGC had announced plans to 
set up an integrated gas processing plant having a processing capacity of 10 million metric standard cubic feet per day and a combined cycle power plant of more than 2000 MW capacity and a value-added product (VAP) plant, this will certainly create more employment/Jobs and will led to the growth of industrial sector and Urbanization of Palghar.

Demographics
As of 2011 India census,[3] Palghar had a population of 68,930 Males constitute 36,523 i.e. 52.9% of the population and females 32,407 i.e. 47.1% of the population. Palghar has an average literacy rate of 77.52%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 81.2%, and female literacy is 73.35%. In Palghar, 11.8% of the population is under 6 years of age.

For a town its size, Palghar is surprisingly cosmopolitan. Being a border town between Gujarat and Maharashtra and being close to Mumbai, it has a good percentage of population of people from other parts of country besides Maharashtra and Gujarat like Rajasthan, Kerala and North India. Most of the rich landlords of Palghar made their money trading grass to the dairies in Mumbai. Grass trading is a major occupation of many families in Palghar. The town is also close to an industrial complex, located at Boisar and India's first nuclear power plant, located at Tarapur.

Industrialization is gradually changing the face of Palghar. The town is getting a make-over of sorts due to Industrialization. Palghar's youth are getting employment in the small scale and medium scale industries coming up in and around the area. In the olden days agriculture was one of the main source of livelihood, but Industrialization has opened up new avenues for them. With space & infrastructure constraints in Mumbai proper, Vasai, Boisar - Palghar proves to be the leading avenue in Western suburbs for setting up new industry / expansion purposes. 